CHAPTER I


There was no possibility of taking a walk that day. We had been
wandering, indeed, in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the morning;
but since dinner (Mrs. Reed, when there was no company, dined early)
the cold winter wind had brought with it clouds so sombre, and a rain
so penetrating, that further outdoor exercise was now out of the
question.

I was glad of it: I never liked long walks, especially on chilly
afternoons: dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight,
with nipped fingers and toes, and a heart saddened by the chidings of
Bessie, the nurse, and humbled by the consciousness of my physical
inferiority to Eliza, John, and Georgiana Reed.

The said Eliza, John, and Georgiana were now clustered round their mama
in the drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by the fireside, and
with her darlings about her (for the time neither quarrelling nor
crying) looked perfectly happy. Me, she had dispensed from joining the
group; saying, “She regretted to be under the necessity of keeping me
at a distance; but that until she heard from Bessie, and could discover
by her own observation, that I was endeavouring in good earnest to
acquire a more sociable and childlike disposition, a more attractive
and sprightly manner—something lighter, franker, more natural, as it
were—she really must exclude me from privileges intended only for
contented, happy, little children.”

“What does Bessie say I have done?” I asked.

“Jane, I don’t like cavillers or questioners; besides, there is
something truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders in that
manner. Be seated somewhere; and until you can speak pleasantly, remain
silent.”

A breakfast-room adjoined the drawing-room, I slipped in there. It
contained a bookcase: I soon possessed myself of a volume, taking care
that it should be one stored with pictures. I mounted into the
window-seat: gathering up my feet, I sat cross-legged, like a Turk;
and, having drawn the red moreen curtain nearly close, I was shrined in
double retirement.

Folds of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the right hand; to the left
were the clear panes of glass, protecting, but not separating me from
the drear November day. At intervals, while turning over the leaves of
my book, I studied the aspect of that winter afternoon. Afar, it
offered a pale blank of mist and cloud; near a scene of wet lawn and
storm-beat shrub, with ceaseless rain sweeping away wildly before a
long and lamentable blast.

I returned to my book—Bewick’s History of British Birds: the
letterpress thereof I cared little for, generally speaking; and yet
there were certain introductory pages that, child as I was, I could not
pass quite as a blank. They were those which treat of the haunts of
sea-fowl; of “the solitary rocks and promontories” by them only
inhabited; of the coast of Norway, studded with isles from its southern
extremity, the Lindeness, or Naze, to the North Cape—

“Where the Northern Ocean, in vast whirls,
Boils round the naked, melancholy isles
Of farthest Thule; and the Atlantic surge
Pours in among the stormy Hebrides.”


Nor could I pass unnoticed the suggestion of the bleak shores of
Lapland, Siberia, Spitzbergen, Nova Zembla, Iceland, Greenland, with
“the vast sweep of the Arctic Zone, and those forlorn regions of dreary
space,—that reservoir of frost and snow, where firm fields of ice, the
accumulation of centuries of winters, glazed in Alpine heights above
heights, surround the pole, and concentre the multiplied rigours of
extreme cold.” Of these death-white realms I formed an idea of my own:
shadowy, like all the half-comprehended notions that float dim through
children’s brains, but strangely impressive. The words in these
introductory pages connected themselves with the succeeding vignettes,
and gave significance to the rock standing up alone in a sea of billow
and spray; to the broken boat stranded on a desolate coast; to the cold
and ghastly moon glancing through bars of cloud at a wreck just
sinking.

I cannot tell what sentiment haunted the quite solitary churchyard,
with its inscribed headstone; its gate, its two trees, its low horizon,
girdled by a broken wall, and its newly-risen crescent, attesting the
hour of eventide.

The two ships becalmed on a torpid sea, I believed to be marine
phantoms.

The fiend pinning down the thief’s pack behind him, I passed over
quickly: it was an object of terror.

So was the black horned thing seated aloof on a rock, surveying a
distant crowd surrounding a gallows.

Each picture told a story; mysterious often to my undeveloped
understanding and imperfect feelings, yet ever profoundly interesting:
as interesting as the tales Bessie sometimes narrated on winter
evenings, when she chanced to be in good humour; and when, having
brought her ironing-table to the nursery hearth, she allowed us to sit
about it, and while she got up Mrs. Reed’s lace frills, and crimped her
nightcap borders, fed our eager attention with passages of love and
adventure taken from old fairy tales and other ballads; or (as at a
later period I discovered) from the pages of Pamela, and Henry, Earl of
Moreland.

With Bewick on my knee, I was then happy: happy at least in my way. I
feared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon. The
breakfast-room door opened.

“Boh! Madam Mope!” cried the voice of John Reed; then he paused: he
found the room apparently empty.

“Where the dickens is she!” he continued. “Lizzy! Georgy! (calling to
his sisters) Joan is not here: tell mama she is run out into the
rain—bad animal!”

“It is well I drew the curtain,” thought I; and I wished fervently he
might not discover my hiding-place: nor would John Reed have found it
out himself; he was not quick either of vision or conception; but Eliza
just put her head in at the door, and said at once—

“She is in the window-seat, to be sure, Jack.”

And I came out immediately, for I trembled at the idea of being dragged
forth by the said Jack.

“What do you want?” I asked, with awkward diffidence.

“Say, ‘What do you want, Master Reed?’” was the answer. “I want you to
come here;” and seating himself in an arm-chair, he intimated by a
gesture that I was to approach and stand before him.

John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old; four years older than
I, for I was but ten: large and stout for his age, with a dingy and
unwholesome skin; thick lineaments in a spacious visage, heavy limbs
and large extremities. He gorged himself habitually at table, which
made him bilious, and gave him a dim and bleared eye and flabby cheeks.
He ought now to have been at school; but his mama had taken him home
for a month or two, “on account of his delicate health.” Mr. Miles, the
master, affirmed that he would do very well if he had fewer cakes and
sweetmeats sent him from home; but the mother’s heart turned from an
opinion so harsh, and inclined rather to the more refined idea that
John’s sallowness was owing to over-application and, perhaps, to pining
after home.

John had not much affection for his mother and sisters, and an
antipathy to me. He bullied and punished me; not two or three times in
the week, nor once or twice in the day, but continually: every nerve I
had feared him, and every morsel of flesh in my bones shrank when he
came near. There were moments when I was bewildered by the terror he
inspired, because I had no appeal whatever against either his menaces
or his inflictions; the servants did not like to offend their young
master by taking my part against him, and Mrs. Reed was blind and deaf
on the subject: she never saw him strike or heard him abuse me, though
he did both now and then in her very presence, more frequently,
however, behind her back.

Habitually obedient to John, I came up to his chair: he spent some
three minutes in thrusting out his tongue at me as far as he could
without damaging the roots: I knew he would soon strike, and while
dreading the blow, I mused on the disgusting and ugly appearance of him
who would presently deal it. I wonder if he read that notion in my
face; for, all at once, without speaking, he struck suddenly and
strongly. I tottered, and on regaining my equilibrium retired back a
step or two from his chair.

“That is for your impudence in answering mama awhile since,” said he,
“and for your sneaking way of getting behind curtains, and for the look
you had in your eyes two minutes since, you rat!”

Accustomed to John Reed’s abuse, I never had an idea of replying to it;
my care was how to endure the blow which would certainly follow the
insult.

“What were you doing behind the curtain?” he asked.

“I was reading.”

“Show the book.”

I returned to the window and fetched it thence.

“You have no business to take our books; you are a dependent, mama
says; you have no money; your father left you none; you ought to beg,
and not to live here with gentlemen’s children like us, and eat the
same meals we do, and wear clothes at our mama’s expense. Now, I’ll
teach you to rummage my bookshelves: for they _are_ mine; all the house
belongs to me, or will do in a few years. Go and stand by the door, out
of the way of the mirror and the windows.”

I did so, not at first aware what was his intention; but when I saw him
lift and poise the book and stand in act to hurl it, I instinctively
started aside with a cry of alarm: not soon enough, however; the volume
was flung, it hit me, and I fell, striking my head against the door and
cutting it. The cut bled, the pain was sharp: my terror had passed its
climax; other feelings succeeded.

“Wicked and cruel boy!” I said. “You are like a murderer—you are like a
slave-driver—you are like the Roman emperors!”

I had read Goldsmith’s History of Rome, and had formed my opinion of
Nero, Caligula, &c. Also I had drawn parallels in silence, which I
never thought thus to have declared aloud.

“What! what!” he cried. “Did she say that to me? Did you hear her,
Eliza and Georgiana? Won’t I tell mama? but first—”

He ran headlong at me: I felt him grasp my hair and my shoulder: he had
closed with a desperate thing. I really saw in him a tyrant, a
murderer. I felt a drop or two of blood from my head trickle down my
neck, and was sensible of somewhat pungent suffering: these sensations
for the time predominated over fear, and I received him in frantic
sort. I don’t very well know what I did with my hands, but he called me
“Rat! Rat!” and bellowed out aloud. Aid was near him: Eliza and
Georgiana had run for Mrs. Reed, who was gone upstairs: she now came
upon the scene, followed by Bessie and her maid Abbot. We were parted:
I heard the words—

“Dear! dear! What a fury to fly at Master John!”

“Did ever anybody see such a picture of passion!”

Then Mrs. Reed subjoined—

“Take her away to the red-room, and lock her in there.” Four hands were
immediately laid upon me, and I was borne upstairs.




CHAPTER II


I resisted all the way: a new thing for me, and a circumstance which
greatly strengthened the bad opinion Bessie and Miss Abbot were
disposed to entertain of me. The fact is, I was a trifle beside myself;
or rather _out_ of myself, as the French would say: I was conscious
that a moment’s mutiny had already rendered me liable to strange
penalties, and, like any other rebel slave, I felt resolved, in my
desperation, to go all lengths.

“Hold her arms, Miss Abbot: she’s like a mad cat.”

“For shame! for shame!” cried the lady’s-maid. “What shocking conduct,
Miss Eyre, to strike a young gentleman, your benefactress’s son! Your
young master.”

“Master! How is he my master? Am I a servant?”

“No; you are less than a servant, for you do nothing for your keep.
There, sit down, and think over your wickedness.”

They had got me by this time into the apartment indicated by Mrs. Reed,
and had thrust me upon a stool: my impulse was to rise from it like a
spring; their two pair of hands arrested me instantly.

“If you don’t sit still, you must be tied down,” said Bessie. “Miss
Abbot, lend me your garters; she would break mine directly.”

Miss Abbot turned to divest a stout leg of the necessary ligature. This
preparation for bonds, and the additional ignominy it inferred, took a
little of the excitement out of me.

“Don’t take them off,” I cried; “I will not stir.”

In guarantee whereof, I attached myself to my seat by my hands.

“Mind you don’t,” said Bessie; and when she had ascertained that I was
really subsiding, she loosened her hold of me; then she and Miss Abbot
stood with folded arms, looking darkly and doubtfully on my face, as
incredulous of my sanity.

“She never did so before,” at last said Bessie, turning to the Abigail.

“But it was always in her,” was the reply. “I’ve told Missis often my
opinion about the child, and Missis agreed with me. She’s an underhand
little thing: I never saw a girl of her age with so much cover.”

Bessie answered not; but ere long, addressing me, she said—

“You ought to be aware, Miss, that you are under obligations to Mrs.
Reed: she keeps you: if she were to turn you off, you would have to go
to the poorhouse.”

I had nothing to say to these words: they were not new to me: my very
first recollections of existence included hints of the same kind. This
reproach of my dependence had become a vague sing-song in my ear: very
painful and crushing, but only half intelligible. Miss Abbot joined in—

“And you ought not to think yourself on an equality with the Misses
Reed and Master Reed, because Missis kindly allows you to be brought up
with them. They will have a great deal of money, and you will have
none: it is your place to be humble, and to try to make yourself
agreeable to them.”

“What we tell you is for your good,” added Bessie, in no harsh voice,
“you should try to be useful and pleasant, then, perhaps, you would
have a home here; but if you become passionate and rude, Missis will
send you away, I am sure.”

“Besides,” said Miss Abbot, “God will punish her: He might strike her
dead in the midst of her tantrums, and then where would she go? Come,
Bessie, we will leave her: I wouldn’t have her heart for anything. Say
your prayers, Miss Eyre, when you are by yourself; for if you don’t
repent, something bad might be permitted to come down the chimney and
fetch you away.”

They went, shutting the door, and locking it behind them.

The red-room was a square chamber, very seldom slept in, I might say
never, indeed, unless when a chance influx of visitors at Gateshead
Hall rendered it necessary to turn to account all the accommodation it
contained: yet it was one of the largest and stateliest chambers in the
mansion. A bed supported on massive pillars of mahogany, hung with
curtains of deep red damask, stood out like a tabernacle in the centre;
the two large windows, with their blinds always drawn down, were half
shrouded in festoons and falls of similar drapery; the carpet was red;
the table at the foot of the bed was covered with a crimson cloth; the
walls were a soft fawn colour with a blush of pink in it; the wardrobe,
the toilet-table, the chairs were of darkly polished old mahogany. Out
of these deep surrounding shades rose high, and glared white, the
piled-up mattresses and pillows of the bed, spread with a snowy
Marseilles counterpane. Scarcely less prominent was an ample cushioned
easy-chair near the head of the bed, also white, with a footstool
before it; and looking, as I thought, like a pale throne.

This room was chill, because it seldom had a fire; it was silent,
because remote from the nursery and kitchen; solemn, because it was
known to be so seldom entered. The house-maid alone came here on
Saturdays, to wipe from the mirrors and the furniture a week’s quiet
dust: and Mrs. Reed herself, at far intervals, visited it to review the
contents of a certain secret drawer in the wardrobe, where were stored
divers parchments, her jewel-casket, and a miniature of her deceased
husband; and in those last words lies the secret of the red-room—the
spell which kept it so lonely in spite of its grandeur.

Mr. Reed had been dead nine years: it was in this chamber he breathed
his last; here he lay in state; hence his coffin was borne by the
undertaker’s men; and, since that day, a sense of dreary consecration
had guarded it from frequent intrusion.

My seat, to which Bessie and the bitter Miss Abbot had left me riveted,
was a low ottoman near the marble chimney-piece; the bed rose before
me; to my right hand there was the high, dark wardrobe, with subdued,
broken reflections varying the gloss of its panels; to my left were the
muffled windows; a great looking-glass between them repeated the vacant
majesty of the bed and room. I was not quite sure whether they had
locked the door; and when I dared move, I got up and went to see. Alas!
yes: no jail was ever more secure. Returning, I had to cross before the
looking-glass; my fascinated glance involuntarily explored the depth it
revealed. All looked colder and darker in that visionary hollow than in
reality: and the strange little figure there gazing at me, with a white
face and arms specking the gloom, and glittering eyes of fear moving
where all else was still, had the effect of a real spirit: I thought it
like one of the tiny phantoms, half fairy, half imp, Bessie’s evening
stories represented as coming out of lone, ferny dells in moors, and
appearing before the eyes of belated travellers. I returned to my
stool.

Superstition was with me at that moment; but it was not yet her hour
for complete victory: my blood was still warm; the mood of the revolted
slave was still bracing me with its bitter vigour; I had to stem a
rapid rush of retrospective thought before I quailed to the dismal
present.

All John Reed’s violent tyrannies, all his sisters’ proud indifference,
all his mother’s aversion, all the servants’ partiality, turned up in
my disturbed mind like a dark deposit in a turbid well. Why was I
always suffering, always browbeaten, always accused, for ever
condemned? Why could I never please? Why was it useless to try to win
any one’s favour? Eliza, who was headstrong and selfish, was respected.
Georgiana, who had a spoiled temper, a very acrid spite, a captious and
insolent carriage, was universally indulged. Her beauty, her pink
cheeks and golden curls, seemed to give delight to all who looked at
her, and to purchase indemnity for every fault. John no one thwarted,
much less punished; though he twisted the necks of the pigeons, killed
the little pea-chicks, set the dogs at the sheep, stripped the hothouse
vines of their fruit, and broke the buds off the choicest plants in the
conservatory: he called his mother “old girl,” too; sometimes reviled
her for her dark skin, similar to his own; bluntly disregarded her
wishes; not unfrequently tore and spoiled her silk attire; and he was
still “her own darling.” I dared commit no fault: I strove to fulfil
every duty; and I was termed naughty and tiresome, sullen and sneaking,
from morning to noon, and from noon to night.

My head still ached and bled with the blow and fall I had received: no
one had reproved John for wantonly striking me; and because I had
turned against him to avert farther irrational violence, I was loaded
with general opprobrium.

“Unjust!—unjust!” said my reason, forced by the agonising stimulus into
precocious though transitory power: and Resolve, equally wrought up,
instigated some strange expedient to achieve escape from insupportable
oppression—as running away, or, if that could not be effected, never
eating or drinking more, and letting myself die.

What a consternation of soul was mine that dreary afternoon! How all my
brain was in tumult, and all my heart in insurrection! Yet in what
darkness, what dense ignorance, was the mental battle fought! I could
not answer the ceaseless inward question—_why_ I thus suffered; now, at
the distance of—I will not say how many years, I see it clearly.

I was a discord in Gateshead Hall: I was like nobody there; I had
nothing in harmony with Mrs. Reed or her children, or her chosen
vassalage. If they did not love me, in fact, as little did I love them.
They were not bound to regard with affection a thing that could not
sympathise with one amongst them; a heterogeneous thing, opposed to
them in temperament, in capacity, in propensities; a useless thing,
incapable of serving their interest, or adding to their pleasure; a
noxious thing, cherishing the germs of indignation at their treatment,
of contempt of their judgment. I know that had I been a sanguine,
brilliant, careless, exacting, handsome, romping child—though equally
dependent and friendless—Mrs. Reed would have endured my presence more
complacently; her children would have entertained for me more of the
cordiality of fellow-feeling; the servants would have been less prone
to make me the scapegoat of the nursery.

Daylight began to forsake the red-room; it was past four o’clock, and
the beclouded afternoon was tending to drear twilight. I heard the rain
still beating continuously on the staircase window, and the wind
howling in the grove behind the hall; I grew by degrees cold as a
stone, and then my courage sank. My habitual mood of humiliation,
self-doubt, forlorn depression, fell damp on the embers of my decaying
ire. All said I was wicked, and perhaps I might be so; what thought had
I been but just conceiving of starving myself to death? That certainly
was a crime: and was I fit to die? Or was the vault under the chancel
of Gateshead Church an inviting bourne? In such vault I had been told
did Mr. Reed lie buried; and led by this thought to recall his idea, I
dwelt on it with gathering dread. I could not remember him; but I knew
that he was my own uncle—my mother’s brother—that he had taken me when
a parentless infant to his house; and that in his last moments he had
required a promise of Mrs. Reed that she would rear and maintain me as
one of her own children. Mrs. Reed probably considered she had kept
this promise; and so she had, I dare say, as well as her nature would
permit her; but how could she really like an interloper not of her
race, and unconnected with her, after her husband’s death, by any tie?
It must have been most irksome to find herself bound by a hard-wrung
pledge to stand in the stead of a parent to a strange child she could
not love, and to see an uncongenial alien permanently intruded on her
own family group.

A singular notion dawned upon me. I doubted not—never doubted—that if
Mr. Reed had been alive he would have treated me kindly; and now, as I
sat looking at the white bed and overshadowed walls—occasionally also
turning a fascinated eye towards the dimly gleaming mirror—I began to
recall what I had heard of dead men, troubled in their graves by the
violation of their last wishes, revisiting the earth to punish the
perjured and avenge the oppressed; and I thought Mr. Reed’s spirit,
harassed by the wrongs of his sister’s child, might quit its
abode—whether in the church vault or in the unknown world of the
departed—and rise before me in this chamber. I wiped my tears and
hushed my sobs, fearful lest any sign of violent grief might waken a
preternatural voice to comfort me, or elicit from the gloom some haloed
face, bending over me with strange pity. This idea, consolatory in
theory, I felt would be terrible if realised: with all my might I
endeavoured to stifle it—I endeavoured to be firm. Shaking my hair from
my eyes, I lifted my head and tried to look boldly round the dark room;
at this moment a light gleamed on the wall. Was it, I asked myself, a
ray from the moon penetrating some aperture in the blind? No; moonlight
was still, and this stirred; while I gazed, it glided up to the ceiling
and quivered over my head. I can now conjecture readily that this
streak of light was, in all likelihood, a gleam from a lantern carried
by some one across the lawn: but then, prepared as my mind was for
horror, shaken as my nerves were by agitation, I thought the swift
darting beam was a herald of some coming vision from another world. My
heart beat thick, my head grew hot; a sound filled my ears, which I
deemed the rushing of wings; something seemed near me; I was oppressed,
suffocated: endurance broke down; I rushed to the door and shook the
lock in desperate effort. Steps came running along the outer passage;
the key turned, Bessie and Abbot entered.

“Miss Eyre, are you ill?” said Bessie.

“What a dreadful noise! it went quite through me!” exclaimed Abbot.

“Take me out! Let me go into the nursery!” was my cry.

“What for? Are you hurt? Have you seen something?” again demanded
Bessie.

“Oh! I saw a light, and I thought a ghost would come.” I had now got
hold of Bessie’s hand, and she did not snatch it from me.

“She has screamed out on purpose,” declared Abbot, in some disgust.
“And what a scream! If she had been in great pain one would have
excused it, but she only wanted to bring us all here: I know her
naughty tricks.”

“What is all this?” demanded another voice peremptorily; and Mrs. Reed
came along the corridor, her cap flying wide, her gown rustling
stormily. “Abbot and Bessie, I believe I gave orders that Jane Eyre
should be left in the red-room till I came to her myself.”

“Miss Jane screamed so loud, ma’am,” pleaded Bessie.

“Let her go,” was the only answer. “Loose Bessie’s hand, child: you
cannot succeed in getting out by these means, be assured. I abhor
artifice, particularly in children; it is my duty to show you that
tricks will not answer: you will now stay here an hour longer, and it
is only on condition of perfect submission and stillness that I shall
liberate you then.”

“O aunt! have pity! Forgive me! I cannot endure it—let me be punished
some other way! I shall be killed if—”

“Silence! This violence is all most repulsive:” and so, no doubt, she
felt it. I was a precocious actress in her eyes; she sincerely looked
on me as a compound of virulent passions, mean spirit, and dangerous
duplicity.

Bessie and Abbot having retreated, Mrs. Reed, impatient of my now
frantic anguish and wild sobs, abruptly thrust me back and locked me
in, without farther parley. I heard her sweeping away; and soon after
she was gone, I suppose I had a species of fit: unconsciousness closed
the scene.




CHAPTER III


The next thing I remember is, waking up with a feeling as if I had had
a frightful nightmare, and seeing before me a terrible red glare,
crossed with thick black bars. I heard voices, too, speaking with a
hollow sound, and as if muffled by a rush of wind or water: agitation,
uncertainty, and an all-predominating sense of terror confused my
faculties. Ere long, I became aware that some one was handling me;
lifting me up and supporting me in a sitting posture, and that more
tenderly than I had ever been raised or upheld before. I rested my head
against a pillow or an arm, and felt easy.

In five minutes more the cloud of bewilderment dissolved: I knew quite
well that I was in my own bed, and that the red glare was the nursery
fire. It was night: a candle burnt on the table; Bessie stood at the
bed-foot with a basin in her hand, and a gentleman sat in a chair near
my pillow, leaning over me.

I felt an inexpressible relief, a soothing conviction of protection and
security, when I knew that there was a stranger in the room, an
individual not belonging to Gateshead, and not related to Mrs. Reed.
Turning from Bessie (though her presence was far less obnoxious to me
than that of Abbot, for instance, would have been), I scrutinised the
face of the gentleman: I knew him; it was Mr. Lloyd, an apothecary,
sometimes called in by Mrs. Reed when the servants were ailing: for
herself and the children she employed a physician.

“Well, who am I?” he asked.

I pronounced his name, offering him at the same time my hand: he took
it, smiling and saying, “We shall do very well by-and-by.” Then he laid
me down, and addressing Bessie, charged her to be very careful that I
was not disturbed during the night. Having given some further
directions, and intimated that he should call again the next day, he
departed; to my grief: I felt so sheltered and befriended while he sat
in the chair near my pillow; and as he closed the door after him, all
the room darkened and my heart again sank: inexpressible sadness
weighed it down.

“Do you feel as if you should sleep, Miss?” asked Bessie, rather
softly.

Scarcely dared I answer her; for I feared the next sentence might be
rough. “I will try.”

“Would you like to drink, or could you eat anything?”

“No, thank you, Bessie.”

“Then I think I shall go to bed, for it is past twelve o’clock; but you
may call me if you want anything in the night.”

Wonderful civility this! It emboldened me to ask a question.

“Bessie, what is the matter with me? Am I ill?”

“You fell sick, I suppose, in the red-room with crying; you’ll be
better soon, no doubt.”

Bessie went into the housemaid’s apartment, which was near. I heard her
say—

“Sarah, come and sleep with me in the nursery; I daren’t for my life be
alone with that poor child to-night: she might die; it’s such a strange
thing she should have that fit: I wonder if she saw anything. Missis
was rather too hard.”

Sarah came back with her; they both went to bed; they were whispering
together for half-an-hour before they fell asleep. I caught scraps of
their conversation, from which I was able only too distinctly to infer
the main subject discussed.

“Something passed her, all dressed in white, and vanished”—“A great
black dog behind him”—“Three loud raps on the chamber door”—“A light in
the churchyard just over his grave,” &c., &c.

At last both slept: the fire and the candle went out. For me, the
watches of that long night passed in ghastly wakefulness; ear, eye, and
mind were alike strained by dread: such dread as children only can
feel.

No severe or prolonged bodily illness followed this incident of the
red-room; it only gave my nerves a shock of which I feel the
reverberation to this day. Yes, Mrs. Reed, to you I owe some fearful
pangs of mental suffering, but I ought to forgive you, for you knew not
what you did: while rending my heart-strings, you thought you were only
uprooting my bad propensities.

Next day, by noon, I was up and dressed, and sat wrapped in a shawl by
the nursery hearth. I felt physically weak and broken down: but my
worse ailment was an unutterable wretchedness of mind: a wretchedness
which kept drawing from me silent tears; no sooner had I wiped one salt
drop from my cheek than another followed. Yet, I thought, I ought to
have been happy, for none of the Reeds were there, they were all gone
out in the carriage with their mama. Abbot, too, was sewing in another
room, and Bessie, as she moved hither and thither, putting away toys
and arranging drawers, addressed to me every now and then a word of
unwonted kindness. This state of things should have been to me a
paradise of peace, accustomed as I was to a life of ceaseless reprimand
and thankless fagging; but, in fact, my racked nerves were now in such
a state that no calm could soothe, and no pleasure excite them
agreeably.

Bessie had been down into the kitchen, and she brought up with her a
tart on a certain brightly painted china plate, whose bird of paradise,
nestling in a wreath of convolvuli and rosebuds, had been wont to stir
in me a most enthusiastic sense of admiration; and which plate I had
often petitioned to be allowed to take in my hand in order to examine
it more closely, but had always hitherto been deemed unworthy of such a
privilege. This precious vessel was now placed on my knee, and I was
cordially invited to eat the circlet of delicate pastry upon it. Vain
favour! coming, like most other favours long deferred and often wished
for, too late! I could not eat the tart; and the plumage of the bird,
the tints of the flowers, seemed strangely faded: I put both plate and
tart away. Bessie asked if I would have a book: the word _book_ acted
as a transient stimulus, and I begged her to fetch Gulliver’s Travels
from the library. This book I had again and again perused with delight.
I considered it a narrative of facts, and discovered in it a vein of
interest deeper than what I found in fairy tales: for as to the elves,
having sought them in vain among foxglove leaves and bells, under
mushrooms and beneath the ground-ivy mantling old wall-nooks, I had at
length made up my mind to the sad truth, that they were all gone out of
England to some savage country where the woods were wilder and thicker,
and the population more scant; whereas, Lilliput and Brobdignag being,
in my creed, solid parts of the earth’s surface, I doubted not that I
might one day, by taking a long voyage, see with my own eyes the little
fields, houses, and trees, the diminutive people, the tiny cows, sheep,
and birds of the one realm; and the corn-fields forest-high, the mighty
mastiffs, the monster cats, the tower-like men and women, of the other.
Yet, when this cherished volume was now placed in my hand—when I turned
over its leaves, and sought in its marvellous pictures the charm I had,
till now, never failed to find—all was eerie and dreary; the giants
were gaunt goblins, the pigmies malevolent and fearful imps, Gulliver a
most desolate wanderer in most dread and dangerous regions. I closed
the book, which I dared no longer peruse, and put it on the table,
beside the untasted tart.

Bessie had now finished dusting and tidying the room, and having washed
her hands, she opened a certain little drawer, full of splendid shreds
of silk and satin, and began making a new bonnet for Georgiana’s doll.
Meantime she sang: her song was—

“In the days when we went gipsying,
    A long time ago.”


I had often heard the song before, and always with lively delight; for
Bessie had a sweet voice,—at least, I thought so. But now, though her
voice was still sweet, I found in its melody an indescribable sadness.
Sometimes, preoccupied with her work, she sang the refrain very low,
very lingeringly; “A long time ago” came out like the saddest cadence
of a funeral hymn. She passed into another ballad, this time a really
doleful one.

“My feet they are sore, and my limbs they are weary;
    Long is the way, and the mountains are wild;
Soon will the twilight close moonless and dreary
    Over the path of the poor orphan child.

Why did they send me so far and so lonely,
    Up where the moors spread and grey rocks are piled?
Men are hard-hearted, and kind angels only
    Watch o’er the steps of a poor orphan child.

Yet distant and soft the night breeze is blowing,
    Clouds there are none, and clear stars beam mild,
God, in His mercy, protection is showing,
    Comfort and hope to the poor orphan child.

Ev’n should I fall o’er the broken bridge passing,
    Or stray in the marshes, by false lights beguiled,
Still will my Father, with promise and blessing,
    Take to His bosom the poor orphan child.

There is a thought that for strength should avail me,
    Though both of shelter and kindred despoiled;
Heaven is a home, and a rest will not fail me;
    God is a friend to the poor orphan child.”


“Come, Miss Jane, don’t cry,” said Bessie as she finished. She might as
well have said to the fire, “don’t burn!” but how could she divine the
morbid suffering to which I was a prey? In the course of the morning
Mr. Lloyd came again.

“What, already up!” said he, as he entered the nursery. “Well, nurse,
how is she?”

Bessie answered that I was doing very well.

“Then she ought to look more cheerful. Come here, Miss Jane: your name
is Jane, is it not?”

“Yes, sir, Jane Eyre.”

“Well, you have been crying, Miss Jane Eyre; can you tell me what
about? Have you any pain?”

“No, sir.”

“Oh! I daresay she is crying because she could not go out with Missis
in the carriage,” interposed Bessie.

“Surely not! why, she is too old for such pettishness.”

I thought so too; and my self-esteem being wounded by the false charge,
I answered promptly, “I never cried for such a thing in my life: I hate
going out in the carriage. I cry because I am miserable.”

“Oh fie, Miss!” said Bessie.

The good apothecary appeared a little puzzled. I was standing before
him; he fixed his eyes on me very steadily: his eyes were small and
grey; not very bright, but I dare say I should think them shrewd now:
he had a hard-featured yet good-natured looking face. Having considered
me at leisure, he said—

“What made you ill yesterday?”

“She had a fall,” said Bessie, again putting in her word.

“Fall! why, that is like a baby again! Can’t she manage to walk at her
age? She must be eight or nine years old.”

“I was knocked down,” was the blunt explanation, jerked out of me by
another pang of mortified pride; “but that did not make me ill,” I
added; while Mr. Lloyd helped himself to a pinch of snuff.

As he was returning the box to his waistcoat pocket, a loud bell rang
for the servants’ dinner; he knew what it was. “That’s for you, nurse,”
said he; “you can go down; I’ll give Miss Jane a lecture till you come
back.”

Bessie would rather have stayed, but she was obliged to go, because
punctuality at meals was rigidly enforced at Gateshead Hall.

“The fall did not make you ill; what did, then?” pursued Mr. Lloyd when
Bessie was gone.

“I was shut up in a room where there is a ghost till after dark.”

I saw Mr. Lloyd smile and frown at the same time.

“Ghost! What, you are a baby after all! You are afraid of ghosts?”

“Of Mr. Reed’s ghost I am: he died in that room, and was laid out
there. Neither Bessie nor any one else will go into it at night, if
they can help it; and it was cruel to shut me up alone without a
candle,—so cruel that I think I shall never forget it.”

“Nonsense! And is it that makes you so miserable? Are you afraid now in
daylight?”

“No: but night will come again before long: and besides,—I am
unhappy,—very unhappy, for other things.”

“What other things? Can you tell me some of them?”

How much I wished to reply fully to this question! How difficult it was
to frame any answer! Children can feel, but they cannot analyse their
feelings; and if the analysis is partially effected in thought, they
know not how to express the result of the process in words. Fearful,
however, of losing this first and only opportunity of relieving my
grief by imparting it, I, after a disturbed pause, contrived to frame a
meagre, though, as far as it went, true response.

“For one thing, I have no father or mother, brothers or sisters.”

“You have a kind aunt and cousins.”

Again I paused; then bunglingly enounced—

“But John Reed knocked me down, and my aunt shut me up in the
red-room.”

Mr. Lloyd a second time produced his snuff-box.

“Don’t you think Gateshead Hall a very beautiful house?” asked he. “Are
you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at?”

“It is not my house, sir; and Abbot says I have less right to be here
than a servant.”

“Pooh! you can’t be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendid
place?”

“If I had anywhere else to go, I should be glad to leave it; but I can
never get away from Gateshead till I am a woman.”

“Perhaps you may—who knows? Have you any relations besides Mrs. Reed?”

“I think not, sir.”

“None belonging to your father?”

“I don’t know: I asked Aunt Reed once, and she said possibly I might
have some poor, low relations called Eyre, but she knew nothing about
them.”

“If you had such, would you like to go to them?”

I reflected. Poverty looks grim to grown people; still more so to
children: they have not much idea of industrious, working, respectable
poverty; they think of the word only as connected with ragged clothes,
scanty food, fireless grates, rude manners, and debasing vices: poverty
for me was synonymous with degradation.

“No; I should not like to belong to poor people,” was my reply.

“Not even if they were kind to you?”

I shook my head: I could not see how poor people had the means of being
kind; and then to learn to speak like them, to adopt their manners, to
be uneducated, to grow up like one of the poor women I saw sometimes
nursing their children or washing their clothes at the cottage doors of
the village of Gateshead: no, I was not heroic enough to purchase
liberty at the price of caste.

“But are your relatives so very poor? Are they working people?”

“I cannot tell; Aunt Reed says if I have any, they must be a beggarly
set: I should not like to go a begging.”

“Would you like to go to school?”

Again I reflected: I scarcely knew what school was: Bessie sometimes
spoke of it as a place where young ladies sat in the stocks, wore
backboards, and were expected to be exceedingly genteel and precise:
John Reed hated his school, and abused his master; but John Reed’s
tastes were no rule for mine, and if Bessie’s accounts of
school-discipline (gathered from the young ladies of a family where she
had lived before coming to Gateshead) were somewhat appalling, her
details of certain accomplishments attained by these same young ladies
were, I thought, equally attractive. She boasted of beautiful paintings
of landscapes and flowers by them executed; of songs they could sing
and pieces they could play, of purses they could net, of French books
they could translate; till my spirit was moved to emulation as I
listened. Besides, school would be a complete change: it implied a long
journey, an entire separation from Gateshead, an entrance into a new
life.

“I should indeed like to go to school,” was the audible conclusion of
my musings.

“Well, well! who knows what may happen?” said Mr. Lloyd, as he got up.
“The child ought to have change of air and scene,” he added, speaking
to himself; “nerves not in a good state.”

Bessie now returned; at the same moment the carriage was heard rolling
up the gravel-walk.

“Is that your mistress, nurse?” asked Mr. Lloyd. “I should like to
speak to her before I go.”

Bessie invited him to walk into the breakfast-room, and led the way
out. In the interview which followed between him and Mrs. Reed, I
presume, from after-occurrences, that the apothecary ventured to
recommend my being sent to school; and the recommendation was no doubt
readily enough adopted; for as Abbot said, in discussing the subject
with Bessie when both sat sewing in the nursery one night, after I was
in bed, and, as they thought, asleep, “Missis was, she dared say, glad
enough to get rid of such a tiresome, ill-conditioned child, who always
looked as if she were watching everybody, and scheming plots
underhand.” Abbot, I think, gave me credit for being a sort of
infantine Guy Fawkes.

On that same occasion I learned, for the first time, from Miss Abbot’s
communications to Bessie, that my father had been a poor clergyman;
that my mother had married him against the wishes of her friends, who
considered the match beneath her; that my grandfather Reed was so
irritated at her disobedience, he cut her off without a shilling; that
after my mother and father had been married a year, the latter caught
the typhus fever while visiting among the poor of a large manufacturing
town where his curacy was situated, and where that disease was then
prevalent: that my mother took the infection from him, and both died
within a month of each other.

Bessie, when she heard this narrative, sighed and said, “Poor Miss Jane
is to be pitied, too, Abbot.”

“Yes,” responded Abbot; “if she were a nice, pretty child, one might
compassionate her forlornness; but one really cannot care for such a
little toad as that.”

“Not a great deal, to be sure,” agreed Bessie: “at any rate, a beauty
like Miss Georgiana would be more moving in the same condition.”

“Yes, I doat on Miss Georgiana!” cried the fervent Abbot. “Little
darling!—with her long curls and her blue eyes, and such a sweet colour
as she has; just as if she were painted!—Bessie, I could fancy a Welsh
rabbit for supper.”

“So could I—with a roast onion. Come, we’ll go down.” They went.